Hey, welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
Good to see you, man.
Thanks for having me.
Yeah, it's great to have you back on the show.
I've been enjoying a lot of your articles and your videos lately,
and I thought, you know what?
Maybe we should just get together and have an opinion piece by Hennick.
I can do opinions.
Yeah, yeah, I know. You're great, Adam.
And so we're going to talk about a whole bunch of different things,
A lot of the things that you've been talking about, I'm also super interested in.
Some cool articles you've written on Docker, uv.
Last time you were on, we talked about running in production.
And maybe we can review that a little bit and just get some of your takes to see what's changed
and what's still the same over the last couple of years.
But all those things are awesome.
We're going to talk about some of your open source projects.
It's going to be a journey.
It's going to be fun.
Now, before we jump into all that, it's been a couple years since people heard you on the show.
Just a quick background about who you are.
All right.
My name is Hinek.
I usually just go by my first name because it's already overwhelming to most people to pronounce that one correctly.
Hi, Brian.
My last name is Slavak.
There's really not a lot of Hinek around, so I just stick to the first name.
As you can hear, I'm a Czech living in Germany.
and I live in Berlin and I work for a rather small web hosting company in the main restaurant
called VarioMedia. So you probably haven't heard of us unless you speak German because we only serve
the German speaking market. Like we do speak English but our stuff is in German. And I would
say you would call it individual contributor there so we don't have managers so everybody is. And
since we are rather small, stability is like the key thing when I'm building systems and that like
informs a lot of my opinions that you will probably
hear today from me.
Also, I like traveling, and I don't
want to be paged in the middle of my vacation.
I'm having margaritas on a beach.
Yeah, nobody wants to have to put down the margarita
because someone took down the server now.
Also, I'm sure we're going to speak more about that.
But nowadays, I'm also a YouTuber.
So that's very exciting.
And thanks for the shout out in the last Python Bytes.
I really appreciated it.
Yeah, absolutely. You're very welcome. Awesome. And I think it's interesting to have people who
work on small teams, especially smaller companies, because that's the common theme of what people do.
I don't have it pulled up right now, but if you go to the PSF survey and you look at some of the
demographics stuff. It'll say, well, what size of a team do you work on? Is it one person,
two to five, 500 to a thousand? The vast majority is the two to 10 different people. It's not
Google, Facebook, Microsoft. So a lot of the advice that comes from these huge places is just,
I don't know, it's not super relevant. Yeah, people adopt it.
I call it like Google cosplay.
And I feel like my opinions that they are about this whole production thing
are informed by my distinct dislike for this kind of thing.
They're just like some big tech influencers having opinions on stage
and everybody wants to mimic it.
And it just doesn't make any sense.
Because as you said, the long tail is huge.
Like most people work for small companies.
It's just like that.
Yeah.
And so the things you should do, they're just different.
And no disrespect to those companies,
and they have a lot of employees, but in the general population,
it's a very small group of people who have hyperscaling clouds
and whatnot that they're worried about, right?
Yeah, awesome.
All right, well, you know what?
I think I want to start this conversation off here
by talking about some of the articles you've written.
So I think this one's interesting.
Let's talk about virtual environments, okay?
- Yeah.
- Yeah?
I think-- - Love them.
- I do too.
You wrote this article called
Why I Still Use Python Virtual Environments in Docker.
And I do as well.
And when I didn't use Docker,
I had them on my server as well.
And I feel like they're a really interesting,
predictable way to package Python.
And you hear about them, obviously,
oh, well, you're going to create a virtual environment
so you can have multiple projects
in your computer and so on.
But Docker, there's only one app running.
What's the deal with these virtual environments in Docker?
Yeah, I mean, you just said it, right?
It's a lot more predictable in its behavior.
It's a technology that we use everywhere too.
And I just understand what this directory is doing, right?
And I find it very important that when I just go on a server or in a Docker container, I know what a file is doing or how things interact with each other.
And I don't have to hunt them down somewhere else.
Or another popular thing is that I write in the first paragraph is that people use pipinstore user and then set the Python user base directory.
And sure, you can do all these things.
But why would you, right?
Like, what are you gaining?
and it's a lot of vibes
and I admit it in the article too
but I just find it easier to reason about
and not everything
we don't use only things we need
we use affordances in other places too
so why not this
as an abstraction over
an application artifact
because we don't have anything better in Python
yeah and also one of the things
that you point out in your article
that I think is really nice
that's already the way you're working on your computer.
And so when you go to your Docker container,
it's the same.
You don't have to think about,
well, if it's misbehaving in production,
that's because, well, maybe we've changed the Python path
or whatever, right?
It's exactly the same as everyone else is working with.
Yeah, we forgot to set an environment variable.
Oh no, nothing works now.
Exactly.
Oh, boy, that's been interesting.
So, you know, what's your...
Let's talk about Docker just a little bit as well.
I think that alone is a pretty interesting choice.
You said you work on smaller teams
and maybe web hosting companies
give this a little bit of a plus-plus slant on Docker or not.
But Docker, no Docker, a lot of people, I think,
see containers and they think complexity.
They think it's hard to debug.
If something goes wrong in the container, it's opaque to me.
What would you say to people that feel like containers are too complicated?
Obviously, the answer is, as always, it depends.
It's a trade-off like everything else.
We don't give Docker to our customers.
like our customer, we sell mostly LAMP,
like mostly WordPress, which is very interesting these days.
- Oh my gosh.
I don't know if we want to go down that one,
but it is super, super turmoil right now.
- Yeah, yeah.
- No, we don't.
Let's talk about it.
- Matt doesn't know we exist.
It's fine.
Yeah, so you're trading off the things you just said,
like the debuggability and everything
against development of velocity and reproducibility.
So we, for example, we don't run Kubernetes
because it's just too complex for us to run
and we run everything on premise.
So like we do not have anything,
we do not use any external services whatsoever.
- Wow, okay.
- Right, so everything runs into our own data centers.
So we are Europeans, some of the things we do,
other things we do because Germans like it that way.
We can say like our data center is right there.
You can look at it, no data leaves it.
Yeah, if you have to, I can come look at my code through the little rack window.
There it is.
You can try around inside and see how fast you get tasered by the security side.
It's all good.
But we use quite a bit of HashiCorp software.
So we had Consul and Vault before for configuration, service discovery, and secrets.
So we use Nomad because it was a logical add-on to run our applications.
So that's where most of our web applications run.
Everything that can run in containers
usually runs in our Nomad cluster in Docker containers.
And yeah, sometimes there are a bit of a pain to debug.
But you can SSH into a Docker container, right?
So yeah.
And first hot tip of the day, there's
this thing called BusyBox, which is like one command.
And depending on what name you call it,
something different.
And it's just very few bytes.
You can look at it.
And it's static.
And it gives me things like ping.
And I think traceroute is in there, too.
So I can do all these basic things in those containers, too.
So it's not like it's a completely black box.
You can SSH into them.
It's no problem.
A couple of thoughts.
One, I agree with you on--
One more thing.
Yeah, yeah, go ahead.
Yeah, yeah.
We do not run SSH clients on those Docker containers.
So this is an affordance that we get from Nomad,
and I'm sure other cluster managers have that too,
that they allow you to enter containers from the outside.
So you SSH into the host, and from there,
you get into the container.
Right.
There's no SSH service.
Yeah, I do that as well on my stuff.
I've recently moved a couple, maybe a year or two ago,
to running, I used to have a bunch of smaller servers.
I don't know, maybe I bought into the cloud computing
as a bunch of commodity boxes,
and you can just make a bunch of little ones,
and that's the way you do it.
And eventually I'm just like, you know what?
I'm tired of dealing with all these servers.
Putting them all in one thing, running everything in Docker,
keeping it isolated.
And it's been really excellent, so a similar access model there.
i'm not sure this makes sense for you guys but i think for folks who maybe expected still to ssh
into their server and and mess with it you know maybe this doesn't make sense for your customers
but maybe it does for you guys individually behind the scenes is
i like to have a couple of tools a little bit like you were saying busybox
already installed in my Docker container.
So if I need to get into it and ask it questions,
I can actually log in through some sort of Docker exec,
Docker exec, dash IT, sort of ZSH or bash or whatever,
and ask it questions.
What are your thoughts?
Do you think if you put something like,
oh, my Z shell, so you have better command history
while you're poking around,
is that sacrilegious in a Docker container?
How do you feel about this?
You're asking me if you have a fancy...
Well, we are sacrilegious in a different way.
Like our normal servers that we SSH into,
we run phish on them because most of us like phish.
Yeah, sure.
So we have very nice phish prompts running there
and everybody who claims they have to use Bash on their notebooks
because they have to SSH into servers,
look at us.
It's fine.
You can do whatever you want.
It's your servers, man.
I'm with you.
I don't have this strong opinions
because, as I said, we run everything on-prem,
so we have our own Docker registry,
so I'm not losing sleep over how big my containers are.
Obviously, I try to keep the surface small
because everything you install can probably be misused in some way,
can be a problem like XZ, for example.
Things can be dangerous,
but if it helps you to get things done, whatever.
Yeah, when you hear the security folks talk about living off the land,
that's what they mean.
They're like, oh, I somehow got into this machine,
and it turns out that this tool that I needed to access the database
was just laying here, and off it goes, right?
They didn't have to get anything on the server.
So that, in a sense, you kind of want to eliminate.
I do think the tradeoff is, are you pushing to a Docker registry
and shipping the thing all around,
or is it just being built in some local-ish story, right?
Interesting.
Okay.
So the reason that I found out about your article,
your virtual environment article,
is I was actually looking around at your uv article
because, wow, does uv speed up Docker builds?
Oh yeah, oh yeah.
So Jay Miller made a comment just yesterday I saw that,
it was pretty funny, he said uv is the new AI,
and I suppose AI is the new blockchain.
Everyone's excited about it,
there's some minor level of controversy about it,
but I don't know, I'm a big fan.
What are your thoughts on uv these days?
First of all, for people who don't know,
we're talking a lot of two letter acronym,
You said XZ earlier, now uv.
Forget XZ.
That was bad.
But what's uv?
Well, uv is re-implementation of Python packaging in Ruff,
roughly saying, right?
In the Rust.
Yes, Rust.
And they started at the bottom.
They implemented uv pip to replace pip,
UVvnv to re-implement virtualenv, and UVpip compile,
I think, what's the thing?
To do our good old requirements.txt files.
And they did it very fast.
And already back then, I said in a video,
it's nothing new under the sun.
It's like, we've got nothing new.
But this is how you approach this problem.
Because what I think most people don't understand,
and this is a bit of a tangent,
is what an incredible Jenga tower Python's packaging is.
Like since we've been building these things for 30 years,
and there's so many loose parts,
and there's so many workflows that need to be supported.
And oh my God, I mean, just look at uv's bug tracker,
what kind of workflows people need to have supported.
And then you understand why it's hard,
and why nobody before who did not have eight people,
eight hours a day working on it to really move the needle, right?
Yeah, now with 0.30.0, they've now added proper workflow tools, which is very exciting.
Now we are attacking Poetry PDM.
And they own Rai, actually, which they adopted from Arm in Ronaha.
And now we have cross-platform log files, which is very exciting for people like myself,
to develop on a Mac, an ARM Mac, no less,
and deploy to Intel Linux.
Just asking for trouble there.
Yeah.
And just as you said, this is so incredibly fast.
Like, UVSync, you can call after every command.
Like, the thing that makes sure that all your dependencies
are at the state that is written in the log file
is faster than git status.
and I realized that
what Charlie Marsh means
what he said on your podcast
the other day that uv is
categorically faster and it just
enables a completely different
lifestyle. Let's call it
lifestyle.
It does, yeah.
You behave differently when all those
commands are free basically.
Yeah.
That's uv.
It's a virtual tool.
It also installs Python.
Yeah, and I think probably one of the things that I was most interested about, your take,
there was over on Python Bytes, we covered this thing by Simon Willison,
where he kind of summarized a Mastodon thread about uv
and whether it being written in Rust is detrimental to the Python ecosystem or not,
and all of those things.
But I think it was there.
your take was look fast is interesting but one of the really powerful things i think is here is a
single binary that if it's on your computer you can do all things python right and right now that's
it's super without uv it's been really challenging right maybe i want to use pip-tools or i want to
use pip to install something or all of those things are predicated on several steps do you have python
do you have a right version of python have you realized you got to create a virtual environment
because you don't have right access to where there's just before you can get started like well
here's a whole set of conversations you need to have about not terribly complicated things but
things that people might not care about and now if uv is just uv run and even you can even put in
the comment in the top like these are the three libraries i need to run it it'll just run yeah
Also, they don't break.
That's what I meant with the one binary, right?
Like, I think most of Python's bad reputation around packaging
is that things just break because Homebrew updated your Python
or because you didn't activate your virtual length
and accidentally installed something into your global thing.
Or you used pip install dash user,
and now it's in all your virtual lengths,
and you don't know why.
And there's so much unpredictability around these things.
And now suddenly we have this one thing that behaves
in certain ways that people understand
and that people expect it to behave.
And as I said before, this is not necessarily
the way I would like it to behave.
But I understand why it's so important
to just narrow the envelope of packaging of the behaviors
that we expect and that we as a community endorse.
- Yeah, totally agree.
There's certain things I would like to see different as well,
but I'm really happy that Charlie and team are working
on this and pushing it forward
and maybe breaking some paradigms or expectations saying,
look, you don't even have to have Python installed.
We can base it off of, gosh, I forgot the name
project, not dead snakes, but the Python builds, yeah, build standalone. That's it. Exactly.
And we'll just grab it, right? If you don't have Python installed, we'll just grab it.
Now a side issue or maybe a tangent parallel issue is I would love to see something in Python
itself that gives you a binary that you can then deploy, right? uv is great for getting your
machine up running and getting Python dependencies on it and stuff. But Python build my folder,
my package with an endpoint or something. And like Go, like C++, whatever. Here's a binary.
You just run it. It doesn't care what's on your machine. I know there's some packaging type stuff
like Pyto app. I have an app that's based on that. But those are still kind of trying to
these things together in a funky way that Python will allow,
rather than something truly part of that.
It's the same with the standalone builds.
Python really fights you when you try to do
these encapsulated things.
And my dream outcome would be if these standalone builds
would be upstream to proper Cpython.
Because this is really what I would like to have
from python.org, like these directories
that I can put anywhere, and they just work.
But it's not trivial.
And the original author of those standalone builds--
because it's been taken over by Astral now, too--
but the original author was Gregory Shorts, I think.
And he also did this PyOxidizer project,
which was very exciting to me.
But he kind of burned out completely
on working with Python at all, because it
was so frustrating for him to deal with these things
and how Python behaves and fights him
when he tries to do these things.
And yeah, these kind of changes would
have to come from Python proper.
MARK MIRCHANDANI: Yes, it would have to definitely
come from Python proper.
Well, maybe someday.
There's some interesting things are coming along.
We might even have Python in the browser.
MARK MIRCHANDANI: Weirdest things have happened.
MARK MIRCHANDANI: Yeah.
And out in the audience, Tony agrees that--
Super powerful.
I haven't thought much about it.
Won't buy anything to do everything.
It's amazing.
Indeed.
All right.
So you want to talk about the controversies to you or just a segue?
Let me just ask you a question.
So here, I think the controversy is twofold.
And I accept that it's somewhat controversial, but I wouldn't say that it's controversial to me.
I think there's two things.
One, uv is written in Rust.
Rough and Rust.
Yeah, I see the challenge here.
It's written in Rust.
It's not Python.
That makes it harder.
I don't know any Rust.
I might be able to look at Rust codes.
I think that's Rust, but I'd have to do some learning
to actually do anything with it.
And the other is venture-backed versus just open source.
Like, is that healthy?
Yeah.
I think for the Rust part, for me, look, a lot of libraries are written in C++.
And I used to do C++ or C, but I'd rather not go do C.
But, you know, if there's a bunch of C and a bunch of Rust,
they're kind of similar to me.
Like, I'd rather not mess with those, but if I had to, I could learn it feeling.
And so I don't feel terribly worried about Rust in that regard.
But I don't know.
What are your thoughts?
Just some quick takes on this.
Yeah, the quick thing is I think it's much more a thing of context right now.
And it's actually how the thread on Mastodon started.
We were just starting to get off having everything written in C.
So we didn't have to learn C to contribute to certain projects
because we ported them to Python.
Like now the Pyrepl in Python 3.13,
which I'm sure we were talking about, is now in Python.
And suddenly we have more contributions, right?
And now people find this is a regression
when we start moving back to Rust, which in certain ways it is.
But then again, I think people underestimate
how many Rust-savvy people we have now in the community.
So I think the upsides in this case outweigh the downsides.
But of course, everybody has to decide it themselves.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
And it's open source.
Something goes terribly wrong.
Yes, MIT Apache 2.
Yeah, there's already 646 forks.
I'm sure there'll be some more.
No, I'm happy to see Charlie and team working on this.
I told Charlie that a few weeks ago or a couple months ago
when he was on the show to talk about some of these ideas.
I think what I would really like to stress here
is that it's not like Astro came to the page
and just like forbade everybody to stop to do open source packaging.
We had like at least 10 years of trying to tackle this problem
with our resources that we have as open source developers.
And it turned out that we cannot do that.
It's just a too complex problem.
I've been like just a few months ago,
I was literally saying that I would like to see someone
to just put the money where their mouth is
and just bankroll a good packaging tool.
And this is literally what just happened.
So I'm more on the relaxed side of that
because I realized that we just couldn't do it.
Like we tried, we failed many times.
Like there's a whole graveyard of packaging tools.
And right, now we have a good one.
And one day we will probably have to maintain it
because VC is going to VC, but it's fine.
It's interesting, that is for sure.
I definitely know if you want to get VC funding,
having rust as your foundation seems to be the trick right now.
But another thing I want, you know, while we're on this topic,
you made a point in one of the YouTube videos,
which I'll give a shout out to in a bit,
but you said something to the effect of, you know,
be kind to all the people who have worked so hard on this problem before
and don't just trash on the other projects, right?
Six months ago, this thing was mission critical to you,
and it was the way that you did everything,
and now people are saying, oh, it's crap.
I think it's important to keep some perspective.
Yeah, I mean, I've been on the receiving end of such excitement,
so I know exactly how it feels.
You can be excited about something without saying that,
finally, I can stop using X.
Ideally, add the maintainer of X,
so they really know that you finally don't have to use their stuff.
Yeah, exactly.
You don't have to be.
Come on now.
So real quick, give us some of the tips of what you're doing
to make your Docker builds faster.
I know this build cache mount thing is pretty interesting,
letting you, I mean, I adopted some of the ideas you got in here
and some of my own, and Docker builds went so much faster.
Yeah.
I mean, the most important thing is to have multi-stage builds,
which means that you have a separate container
that builds your application, whether it's a virtual
.
As we said before, which I like better,
or if you just build it to a directory
and then somehow get it over.
Because you don't want to have a C compiler
in all your production containers.
It's just a waste of space.
And as you said, living off the land.
It's not good.
Then--
- The hacker's into a desert, not a lush forest.
- Exactly.
I mean, they're still going to figure it out,
but it's just nicer and easier to reason about.
Then judicious layering makes a big difference,
that you are very clear about when you build what,
that you basically sort your commands in the order
in that they are most likely to change.
So in a build container, that means that your last step
is copying the application, and the step before
is copying the dependencies.
Yeah, absolutely.
And so I'll link to one of your articles here.
But the other thing that I think is pretty interesting that people
maybe don't realize or haven't used a lot--
I'm not sure if I see.
And here you go.
Is when you run Docker commands, you
can say --mount equals slash root slash dot cache.
Yeah, that's build cache mounts that you mentioned, yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And what that'll do is when either,
it doesn't matter in this case the way you got it set up,
either pip or uv, if they,
a lot of times when you pip install something,
they'll say, oh, that's already cached locally.
We'll just install it instead of download it, right?
Yeah.
And that'll store somewhere on the host machine
all the cache stuff, right?
It depends, it depends.
So this is something that I didn't spend a ton of time
because you can configure where this is stored.
And in the simplest case, it is just
pulled from the last container that you built.
That is the simplest configuration
that you can use.
So now I tag a latest container, which I never did before,
because for deployments, I usually use numbers.
But now there's always a latest tag,
and it will take the cache from there.
So it's most likely pretty good, because it was literally
the last build.
Yeah, yeah. Okay. Interesting. I see that it's part of the build cache,
the Docker layer cache, not some folder laying around.
I think it's actually part of the container, if I'm not mistaken, completely.
Okay. Yeah. So definitely lightens the load on PyPI a little bit
and makes your stuff faster. So that's all good.
All right. What is next on my list here? Let me have a look.
All right, installing Python, that's probably maybe a segue
that keeps us in the same realm, honestly.
How do you get Python on your machine these days?
If you're going to work on something,
do you brew install it, or do you download it from Python.org?
No, as my friend Justin once wrote,
homebrew's Python is not for you.
That Python is for homebrew to use in their applications.
You notice it very fast, because whenever
they upgrade the Python audio virtual length break.
So this is not great.
So I'm on macOS, and I'm on an Apple Silicon Mac,
which makes things a bit more complicated,
because I need to develop some of my projects on Intel,
because I need to use a driver for a very shitty proprietary
database.
And of course, they don't have that for ARM.
And it's written in C or some sort of binary layer?
Yeah, it's a binary blob.
So I have these two types of projects.
So the official macOS installer from python.org
has this amazing property that you get Python 3.13-intel64.
And when I create a virtual env with that,
I know this virtual env is Intel.
And if not, it's not.
Oh, interesting.
Very nice and predictable for me.
So I really like this behavior.
And on servers, we use dead snakes.
OK.
Yeah, very cool.
Lately, I've been switching to just uv venv,
give it a Python version, which I guess indirectly is using
Python build standalone, right?
Yeah.
They have a bunch of quirks based on the thing
we talked before that they fight that python fights it's a little bit so i cannot use those
in production at least not for everything because i just had some of my packages just won't
install on them that will probably get fixed at some point but yeah five node org is a safe spin
thing and i have to uh shell my friends glyph's tool mop up which just allows you to upgrade those
official installers very easily especially when you use uvx because then it's just one line
Yeah, MopUp is an interesting project from Glyph, as you pointed out, that will update your Python, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, if you've installed it from python.org.
All right, another thing that's interesting if you install Python from python.org is in the installer,
you can customize it and you can check a checkbox that says,
me the free threaded python let's talk about free threaded python what do you think about this this
is one of the more significant changes to python and one of the bigger peps you know we went through
the two to three controversies or challenges so much and i think that was largely because strings
were changed i know there's a bunch of other changes but it seemed to me that the real
challenge of a lot of the upgrades of a lot of the packages been like, well, that used to be bytes
or strings. Now we've got to treat them differently and we've got to change that. That's the part that
was really took the work. And threading seems harder than strings. I don't know. Maybe it's not.
Is this going to be a big challenge for people or what do you think?
Yeah, I guess we will see, right? Like normal code is probably not going to be affected a lot,
But for example, it's a perfect timing
since I'm maintaining Argon2 CFFI.
And as the name says, it depends on the CFFI project
to do the bindings.
And it does not support free threading yet.
So I cannot build free threading wheels with that yet.
Of course, people are already complaining in my issues
about that.
Why isn't your puppy parallel?
Come on now, get this going.
There's probably more projects than just CFFI
that are still stuck in some way
because they are not important enough
for someone from meta being parachuted
into the project and fix everything.
I personally am very excited by free threading
and I was one of the...
I don't know how to call it,
It's a bit of an election, right, to decide on whether or not.
And it was like this, we made public statements
about how we feel about this whole thing.
And I personally felt good about it back then.
I still do.
I think it's a big chance, our one shot we will have
because either this one works out or it's not going to happen ever.
We will never have a three-threaded Python ever
because this is like the perfect constellation of stars.
This is not coming back.
That's a really good point.
We've had the Gilectomy and other attempts before,
but this is fast.
It's accepted.
It's already shipped.
You're right.
If this doesn't work, it's just we're not going to get it.
And we have Meta who also put several paid people on the job
to get it done.
So again, this is one of those things that just cannot be done
by volunteers on the beer money from GitHub sponsors.
This is a big thing that needs serious money to be solved.
So yeah, I'm excited.
But I don't think it's going to be that big of a problem.
And I think it's going to do some very excited things
that we are not thinking about.
Because a lot of the arguments against it
was, oh, threads are bad.
It's hard to write multi-threaded code, which is all true.
The problem is that we just don't have good APIs for that.
You can build good APIs for threading.
You just have to look what Go is doing with channels.
We can have channels in Python once we have good threading.
But we never bothered to build these kind of APIs
because it doesn't make any sense with the guild.
It's better to go async.
That's a really good point.
And I think there's an analogy with async.
Remember, async.io shipped in Python 3.4,
but async await, the keywords in the programming model
shipped in 3.5.
So for a while, it was like, well, you guys figured it out.
And then the programming model got way nicer.
Yeah.
Yeah, I think we might have not gotten this shot
if AsyncIO didn't happen back then,
because it just showed how we can do a test balloon
in a community.
And we don't have to do it perfectly on the first time.
I think we had even breaking changes in minor releases of 3.5
because we had to fix things up.
So yeah, I'm sure it was a bit of an inspiration.
I remember a breaking change somewhere in Python,
but further down the road where the async context,
so the way to say a function was async,
you could use a decorator before async and await came along.
And my code, which was running on MongoDB,
which was using motor,
They were using that older style to get their async.
And then when it got taken out of Python,
it just, well, stuff doesn't run anymore.
There is no such decorator async,
something I can't remember exactly what it was.
But it took a week or two before I could run the new Python
because that wasn't a big deal.
I just didn't use it.
But it did break things.
There was plenty of breaking changes in async.io
because I was quite involved with that whole thing.
And I remember things breaking a lot in the beginning.
But it's good that we don't carry that technical debt around with us now.
Yeah, absolutely.
I want to give a quick shout out to a pytest plugin called pytest-FreeThreaded from Anthony Shaw and friends.
And this one basically lets you run your tests in the free-threaded Python mode and run them with parallelism and stuff like that.
Because if you're going to have a library and you have tests for it
and it's supposed to support free threading,
you should probably test it with free threading actually running at some point, right?
So anyway, people are trying to move their libraries along.
I think they said, look, we tested this on one of the libraries
that said it was free threaded supporting it, segfaulted Python.
So maybe it wasn't quite ready.
So run your tests if you're going to support this.
I think it needs to be stressed that the trick to not break your code
is to just not mutate global data in multiple threads at once.
It's just avoid doing this and you'll be fine.
And most people don't.
So I don't expect like this large scale breakage.
The problem is more in the lower level things like CFFI
and those kind of things that are going to take a lot of time
I think.
Yeah, I agree.
Does your web framework support free threading?
Well, you're going to find out pretty quickly.
You definitely will.
Okay.
So, yeah, I'm personally excited about it as well.
I think we're going to have a lot of good times.
What else about 3.13 are you excited about?
So I feel like Python 3.12 and 3.13 was more like planting trees than a good harvest.
There's a lot of work, a lot of very, very hard work when it's due to these two releases
that don't benefit us immediately, but that build the foundation for great things to come.
And free threading is an example.
Sub-interpreters are an example.
Like internally, I mean, I shouldn't admit it,
but I'm also a Python core developer,
but I'm just not very active because I have enough of my own
stuff going on nowadays.
But internally, the 3.13 is kind of called a secret 4.0,
which everybody who has to do with C APIs have noticed.
Because unlike the releases before, like 3.12, 3.11,
it took quite a while for the ecosystem
to catch up with all the changes to the C API.
Because there's been a lot of changes.
I mean, the PyRipple is great.
Pablo has made a big push for better error messages,
which is also nice.
And they continue to get better.
Yeah, that's great.
Yeah, so this is like the things
that I'm truly user-facing,
but things that I don't really care about that much.
I mean, I use IPython, so I will probably keep using it still.
I just hope that maybe PDB will get better now that we have a better REPL,
because my favorite debugger, PDBPP, has been broken for two releases.
Oh, okay.
Yeah, so that's my hope.
But I'm not really excited about anything from 3.12 and 3.13.
I'm just excited for what those releases are going to give us in the future.
Yeah.
I'm excited for just the entire Faster CPython initiative.
Yes, that too.
And it works out over across, you know.
Yes.
3.11 was probably the biggest one of those, I guess.
Although we'll see about this free threading.
This might, you know, if you've got a lot of cores,
that's a massive difference if you can take advantage of it.
If, yeah, that's a problem, right?
Because I think what was said that they will merge it
if the penalty for non-threaded code is less than 10%,
which it did.
But single-threaded code is going to be slower
in a three-threaded Python build.
That is something we have to keep in mind.
MARK MANDEL: Right.
Yeah.
Well, I guess it depends on your workload,
what you're doing right.
But with little dev tools, I fixed this.
What's new in Python 4?
Here we--
JOHN MUELLER: Ship it.
MARK MANDEL: Ship it.
It's right.
Although I got a few more.
A few more spots.
I got to do a little finer in place in this document.
looking at the what's new in 13.
Okay, also I think, yeah, I think the new REPL is quite nice.
It's been, using the traditional REPL,
I think it's been really challenging, right?
Did you write a loop and you want to go back and edit it?
Well, you got to, okay, I remember that was four lines up
for the four part and then the four again to get,
you know, like that was just challenging
to have multi-line edits on there.
Now, a lot nicer.
Just simple things like key binding, sometimes not working,
or just printing weird stuff into your console.
Yeah, but these are the things kind of like the virtual environment.
Get your virtual environment set up, get your dependencies installed.
It doesn't sound like that big of a deal,
but it is friction to people who come to the ecosystem.
Every paper cart less is good.
Yeah, that's 100% right.
Definitely good.
YouTube
I mean look you're on YouTube right now
but we're talking about you being on YouTube
so it's kind of meta
but yeah you're doing a really good job
with your YouTube videos lately
thank you so much
yeah you're welcome
I think
I've done a lot of
YouTube videos but
even more sit down by yourself
behind a camera for course videos
I have like 270 hours
of course videos
And the editing, the I'm excited to talk to nobody, right?
All of these things are not that easy to do.
And yeah, I want to just talk about what you're up to over there a bit.
Yeah.
I mean, maybe let's start with the silliest reason why I started doing this.
It's I'm very aware and self-conscious about how bad my spoken English is.
So it's my third language.
And I don't speak it often enough.
So there's this joke from my friends at the PyCon when the just
arrived jet-lagged Hinek who only spoke English to the US
immigration officer trying not to get detained.
It's very different from the Hinek like a week later
who spoke to his friends for a week, right?
So my hope is that maybe it forces me to speak a lot more
English in my everyday life.
It turned out I'm way too slow at producing videos.
So that part didn't work out at all.
I mean, you say like 300 hours, but for me,
like the 25-minute video that I've just published,
that's like one hour of full material
that I'm cutting down to 25 minutes.
Yeah.
So that's a lot of work, a lot of editing, and yeah.
And the more serious reason that actually worked out,
and this is not going to be all of Philly,
is I do have a lot of people that follow me
across my platforms and know me from PyCon,
And I've heard the term PyCon cinematic universe put out,
which I'm probably a part of.
But this universe is tiny.
The Python community is huge.
People don't understand how huge they are.
And I mean, just like this Twitter account that
post just like these trivial things that sometimes outright
wrong, they have like hundreds of thousands of followers.
And the same is on YouTube.
I did not
I haven't found any
Python content
on YouTube that I really liked
for the things that I care about. Maybe there's
amazing data science stuff there, but
there's not things that I care about. So I thought
with the usual programmer's
hubris, sure, I can do that.
And I'm trying to
build our own. We're doing it.
How hard can it be?
I'm trying to do content that I
wish existed for
me 15 to 20 years ago. But to be honest, the ultimate trigger is that before COVID, I had
this nice lifestyle where I broke one amazing conference talk per year, like scare quotes,
and I could just travel the world and give it. And this doesn't work anymore. The conference world
has more or less collapsed. Conferences have no money anymore. It's much harder to get invited.
And it was kind of like, I told you I work for a small company,
so my actualization and creativity comes mostly from the community.
And I felt like being cut off.
I couldn't do my creative work anymore because I couldn't.
I couldn't pay for all those flights.
And the same happened with writing.
I mean, whatever Google and Twitter are doing right now,
unless your blog post lands on Hacker News front page,
you basically get no more traffic anymore.
It has been completely obliterated.
My blog has 40% less traffic than a year ago.
And I don't think my content goes stale.
It just changed.
So I thought I should try a new avenue.
I should go where the people are.
I've read somewhere that YouTube is the second biggest search
engine or something.
So yeah.
I'm trying my hand.
Yeah, well, nice work.
Nice work.
It's an interesting outlet.
And you know, you look at,
the numbers are ridiculous, right?
You look at, oh, this person just posted a video on this,
and six hours later it has more views
than if it was a major television series
or something like this.
It's a weird world.
It's a weird world for sure.
I mean, I'm a niche in a niche,
so I don't expect ever to blow up like this.
But yeah, we'll see how it goes.
It's still great.
Let's talk a little bit about some of your projects.
You talked about Argon.
I think maybe one of the things you're best known for
might be Adders, would you say?
What do you think?
It depends who you ask.
I think Adders had the biggest impact on the community
because they are the direct predecessor of data classes
that I designed with Guido and Eric back then.
That goes back to Adders because people
wanted something like Adders in a standard library.
But yeah.
JOHN MUELLER: Tell people about Adders,
for those who don't know.
Yeah.
I mean, imagine data classes, but more powerful.
People sometimes try to compare it to Pydantic,
but that's not that.
Adders is not trying to be a validation thing.
Adders is there for creating classes
written yourself.
I call it a class writing toolkit.
And data classes keep catching up with what we do,
but we are still ahead.
So we have more features.
We work better.
And especially for data science-y things,
because we allow people to define comparisons in a custom way.
So you can compare NumPy arrays and everything.
And you don't need to use type annotations if you hate them.
That's also a big feature we have.
Okay, interesting.
Yeah, so when you create a class,
you can just put some fields on it, and that's great.
But there's probably some other things you might want to do,
like to find a hash and to find an equals and a not equals
and a stir and a repper and all these kinds of things, right?
Yeah.
And you just get that out of the box, right?
And maybe you want the class to be frozen.
Maybe you want slots and these kind of things.
MARK BLYTH: Slots, interesting.
I don't know.
Everyone knows about slots.
Slots are kind of a cheat code for low memory, fast access.
Tell people about slots, dunder slots.
FRANCESC CAMPOY: Well, when you create a class in Python,
by default, it's a so-called dictionary class
because it has a dunder dict field where all the attributes
are defined.
And you can do with those classes whatever you want.
You can just add more attributes.
But if you define a slotted class, which
doesn't have this dunderdict but dunder slots,
and you enumerate all attributes that this class will have,
and it's then baked into the class.
So this has the big upside.
If you try to assign an attribute that doesn't exist,
it will throw an error, which is good because it probably
means that you mistyped.
And this is like the thing that you see from the outside.
From the inside, it's much more interesting
because those classes are more baked
So they are just faster.
They're faster and use less memory.
Yeah, they use quite a bit.
I think named tuples use more memory, you know,
and you think how tuples kind of like as about as bare bones as it can get.
But yeah, it's quite interesting.
And my experience is that even attribute access is a tiny bit faster
than in regular classes.
Yeah, and this is why in the new APIs, it's the default in others.
Like data classes grew slots too, but it's optional in others.
It's now opt out because it's really good.
Oh, it is.
Yeah, yeah, because why not?
And my experience is it's cool to have the dynamic nature of classes and types
and you can do all sorts of stuff to change them,
but most of the time you don't.
And if you're not going to, like you said,
get the I mistyped something catch because they won't let you do it
and the better memory and better performance, right?
Yeah, I think this is something that Rust has changed too.
The influence of Rust on Python
has been that we got a little less dynamic with time,
which I personally think is a good thing
because I started moving away from that sooner.
Using dictionaries and tuples and all these things,
it's just very hard to reason about
when you come back a year later
and try to understand what this code is doing.
Yeah, yeah.
What is this *star kwhargs thing? What are we doing here?
There's still so many APIs. You have a nice IDE, you press F12, you jump to the function and it's *star quarks.
Thank you.
Yes, exactly. You know, if that works out well, there might be a big doc string that says these are the seven things that can actually go in these keyword arguments and here's their type.
And if you're extra lucky, it's true.
Yeah, it's actually true or it's actually comprehensive.
Yeah, I don't know.
I feel a lot of times when you're doing that kind of stuff,
if you end up back in the documentation,
like something's kind of gone a little bit wrong,
like you should probably be able to tell at least,
does it take arguments?
What might they possibly be?
But then you go to the documentation, it's auto-generating.
You're like, well, no, not getting far on this one.
Well, since we have this, the Opinion of Hennig episode,
what are your thoughts on types?
What do you think?
I love types.
Like I just said, I was moving to more static things
in general because it's just easier to reason about,
easier to understand.
And it informs the design of APIs, too,
like which I just find the APIs that come out nowadays
are widely more accessible than we used to have.
And Lukasz Lange's keynote a few years ago at PyCon US
was like, if something is hard to type,
maybe it's just bad design.
That's an interesting take, yeah.
It's not always true, by the way.
There are legitimate use cases for Python
where typing is a bad fit.
And it's completely true.
And it's not great for everything.
But I personally just take any help
that I can get that helps me to make my code more
understandable and help me ensure that I'm writing what I'm thinking I'm writing.
Types help me the best with finding logic errors in what I thought I was passing around
and what I was actually passing around.
Because things that work by accident because something gets autoconverted somewhere are
the most dangerous things because they explode when you are on the beach with your margarita.
Yeah, they do.
And that's not good.
as we already pointed out.
You know, another thing that I really like about them,
I'm kind of on your team with this one as well,
and I really like that, I hinted at that before,
you don't have to go to the documentation and go like,
what is this?
I know it says it takes an options,
but what is an options?
You know, like I have no idea what goes here still.
This doesn't tell me.
But if it means it's this class or it's a dictionary,
well, at least you got some hints on like,
well, this is where I start knowing what I'm supposed to do here.
And also with the editor, right?
If I hit dot, it gives you a way better chance
of just continuing to type instead of going and looking up stuff.
And also, that's something people don't talk that much about.
But it forces you to give things names.
You know?
And sometimes, when you have problems to give a type name,
that's a sign that you don't quite understand what the thing is doing.
Or maybe it's doing too many things.
And that way, you have this instant feedback
about your design and how you think about things.
That I find very useful.
And also, I have to point is, if typing would be just
marking things that could be none or not,
that would be already like 99% of the value of types.
Like just helping to avoid non-type errors.
- Yeah, optional or not optional,
what are we going to do here?
- Yeah.
- Yeah, I do like that it's optional,
that it's progressive, right?
I came from static languages to Python,
and the fact that it didn't have types,
I kind of wanted something.
But I also played around with TypeScript,
and I've battled with the TypeScript system
where it's like, well, we don't know what this thing is,
but you're supposed to pass in something
that's known in the type system.
I know this will work.
Just get out of my way and let me do it.
You know what I mean?
And I think there's a pretty good balance that's caught here.
Yeah, I think, so I have a whole keynote in my head
about the true Python superpower is the graduality.
Because you can start with the biggest trash,
shitty code in a Jupyter notebook
and just work yourself up by putting it in a file,
running rough linter, then adding types, and so on.
And you end up with production code of the best kind.
But you started with complete shit.
And that's how my brain works.
Like, I like to try things out
and then just polish the turd, must I say.
Polish it when it's proven that it's worth putting your time and energy to, right?
And I find this very frustrating with languages like Rust or Go.
I read a lot of Go, and Go won't even compile your thing if you have an unused import.
And this is just so frustrating.
Oh my gosh, okay.
Just eat my trash and make it work.
I will fix it later, I promise.
That's a pretty interesting take.
All right, well, let's give maybe a shout out to Stamina also.
Like, that's--
That was a surprise to me.
Yeah?
Yeah, it's like from my latest projects,
kind of the most popular one, because it just
solved the problem we all have, that we use Tenacity, which
is a great--
sorry, I muted myself for a second.
We all used Tenacity, which is a great package,
but it has no good default because it's also
a very old package.
And everybody's just copy-pasting these standard settings
around that make it behave in a good way.
And it's also, at least back then, didn't do proper typing.
So I just wrote this tiny shim around that
so I can stop copy-pasting the same things over and over again.
It turns out a lot of people have the same problem.
Yeah, so if you've got a function, for example,
like a little example here,
that might crash because an HTTP error.
Like, you know what?
If I just tried this again, I bet it would work, right?
Just add stamina.retry, specify the error.
It's been a while since I checked it out,
but it's got exponential backoff and other things like that.
Oh, and jitter, okay, nice.
Yeah.
I use it in certain things.
It's not very often that you need something like this,
but when you do, you're like, oh, yes, it's getting this.
Like in my experience, you need it
whenever you talk to external systems
because if you're doing this API cost,
it will fail at some point.
Just put it on it.
Nowadays, it has a lot of more features.
You can now have a callable that decides
where you really want to retry.
For example, you get an HTTP error,
But in HTTPX, there's no difference between HTTP error
because you got a 500 back or because you got a 401 back.
If you keep retrying on 401 or 403,
you will get banned from the API, right?
But on a 500, you probably want to retry.
These kind of things.
Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah, the whole rate limiting thing,
that's also tricky to work with.
But I suppose if you said, OK, well, retry it,
but put some kind of delay, maybe it'll be all right.
The delay is built in.
That's the whole point.
It's exponential back off.
Yeah, perfect.
One thing I do want to talk about as well is just Argon.
Yes.
So quick.
Very cool algorithm.
It's one of these so-called memory hard problems
that is somewhat resistant to brute forcing
over just massive parallelism and so on.
Want to talk about that real quick?
Sure.
What do you want to hear?
Well, just tell people what it is.
Maybe, you know, what's your project about
and what should people consider using it, you know?
Yeah, so many, many years ago,
I think it was like 2016 or so,
there was this password hashing competition
because we needed to find a way to hash our passwords
in a way that is, as you just said, memory hard.
Right, if you hear of rainbow tables,
you shouldn't be using MD5,
all these things are all part of that.
We've got to get past that, right?
Yeah, so this is next level
because people were running ASICs,
so programmable boards
that are just specifically for cracking passwords in parallel.
The only way to fight this is make it memory hard.
So like checking these passwords or this hashing algorithm
also needs a lot of memory to work.
There's one more famous one, which is called
S-crypt or Yes-crypt, which is now it is also part of the standard library.
So that's that.
But Argon2 won the password hashing competition.
And yeah, it works.
It's in wide use.
and yeah, I'm maintaining it for now like six years or something.
Or I think longer.
So if you're storing your own passwords,
certainly this is one of the good options.
Do you know what the story is with, oh gosh, what is it?
Is it passlib, I believe?
Oh, passlib.
Oh man, this is, yeah, this is really, man.
Passlib is throwing a lot of warnings about things that it's using
that are being deprecated or even removed.
I feel like it was really great for a while, but now if you go to it, it's like...
Yeah, last edited four years ago, that's a problem.
Yeah, it's not great.
I feel like it was almost on SourceForge or something for a while, which is really...
I can't remember exactly where I saw it.
Bitbucket.
Bitbucket is fine.
No, it's not.
It's gone.
Oh, is Bitbucket
the URL, this is Heptapod, which is the only Mercurial hosting
that open source projects can use nowadays.
Yeah.
There you go.
Bitbucket, you're getting Mercurial support, yeah.
I see.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But will they also have Argon2 support, which is--
Oh, they use my library.
Yeah, that's what I thought.
Yeah, super cool.
Awesome.
All right.
Well, let's close this out with one more take
I think we're pretty much out of time, but it's been a lot of fun.
LLMs.
LLMs writing code for us.
Are we just going to be out of work in a year or two?
What do you think about this?
I'm not super worried about it, but it's definitely changing things, I think.
When you say we, it can mean we, the two of us, and the answer is clearly no.
I think we, as in Michael and Hinnick, will benefit from LLMs, I think.
And we as programmers in general, and especially junior programmers, that's going to be a different
thing.
And I wouldn't dare to guess how that will play out.
I'm personally using LLMs.
I use Anthropic.
But I use it in a way that I feel like you have to be very senior to actually use that.
Because when you ask it for code, you just get code with old libraries because it's trained on old code from GitHub, right?
Copilot once gave me SQL injection code.
It'll be fine.
I mean, what is the most common security problem with code?
Yeah, SQL injections.
Of course, it's going to be in those LLMs and suggesting it to me.
So I think it is a useful tool.
It usually doesn't give me what I need,
but it gives me enough to help me to ask a search engine
what I actually need.
So that's what I'm going to say.
What it's actually really good for is writing SQL,
in my experience, because my brain,
I somehow cannot write CTEs.
The syntax, I don't know.
I just can't.
So I usually ask an LLM to write the CTE for me
and then just write the rest of the query.
Well, for me, that's regular expressions.
That's why I go to LLMs.
I'm like, you need to write me a regular expression
with some capture groups because this is too much for me.
JQ is also a good example for LLMs.
Yeah.
I've been using LM Studio, which is really nice.
It lets you download a bunch of different models
I've been running Lama and Mistral lately, and they've both been pretty good.
Yeah, but they run locally, right?
They run, it's free, it's super nice.
So one thing that's pretty interesting here is if you talked about this as well,
and I don't know what this trend means,
but if you go to Stack Overflow Trends and you look at the most popular languages
and you look right around late 2022, early 2023,
There is a ridiculous drop in the popularity of questions
on Stack Overflow for Python, for JavaScript,
and interestingly not a whole lot for the others.
But that's when ChatGPT came out.
So I don't know what it's going to mean,
but it's clearly having some kind of effect somewhere.
But that might just be making people more productive
and they're not on Stack Overflow.
That might be a Stack Overflow problem.
and not a development ecosystem problem.
The friction to ask LLM is much smaller
than asking actual people
and then get trolled by some moderator or whatever.
So I can see that people are going to prefer LLMs
to talking to people.
And also most questions on Stack Overflow
are quite trivial, to be honest.
So I think that makes sense.
How do I connect to a database?
is used in this library, right?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Or how do I disable SSL because I'm getting this certificate
error all the time, the classics.
But it also means that a lot of trash code
is being written right now, right?
Like the things that I just told you,
that where you and I, we look at this code
and we say, OK, this in principle is useful,
but I cannot put this into production
because error handling is wrong or there's
some security issue or whatever.
This is something that actually concerns me.
A lot of people are writing code they don't understand
and putting into production,
and I think that's going to have consequences
that are not going to be pretty.
Yeah, I totally agree with you.
And also one of my concerns, and you touched on as well,
is how do you go from beginning developer
to slightly beyond junior developer?
I don't know if LLMs are going to help people
make that jump quicker,
Or if they're just going to make that jump like a wider chasm because people won't need juniors because they're just going to ask the LLM to just do the thing, you know?
Yeah, yeah.
This is the problem.
Like bean counters are going to look into Excel and I got to wonder what makes more sense, right?
And the fact they're eating their seed for next year and there's suddenly, oh my God, why are there no new senior software engineers?
Well, we didn't make them.
It's going to be like Cobalt.
There'll be fewer people who are really, really needed
to keep things working.
We will never retire, Michael.
Exactly.
We're going to be programming on the beach
with our margaritas in our 70s.
Well, let's leave it there.
Is that a positive take?
I don't know.
I really enjoyed our conversation, though.
And a lot of good advice for people.
So thanks for being here.
Thanks for having me.
Yeah, you bet.
See you later.
Tack.